---
layout: post
title:  "Japanese - Kana"
date:   2017-04-23
categories: japanese kana
---

I should make mention that trying to learn Japanese is a hobby/chore that I do.

Coming from a Chinese background, Kanji comes to me a lot easier than most people, but I struggle with everything else.

In any case, yesterday, in the midst of AP studying (frick), I decided to start a really ambitious project: **Translate a book to English :ooooooo**

...I gave up 1/4 of the way into the first sentence this morning. I think the reading was way too high level for me. However, I did learn a new grammar form so that's nice.
It got me thinking maybe I should start blogging about Japanese too, mostly to keep my learning in check (I'm lazy!).

So here we go:

## Rundown

As quick run down: Japanese verbs have stems and change root when conjugated. However, unlike in romance languages, verbs do not conjugate by gender or person but rather, only by time and formality.

As an example:

>食べる　[infinitive] ->　食べます [formal ~masu form]

Aside from verbs, Japanese also has particles which mark certain sections of the sentence.

For example: は marks a noun as the topic and か marks the sentence as a question.

Now with that out of the way, let's talk about ~kana.

## Kana

From my understanding, kana is a marker used in casual speech used to express doubt or wonder.

For example, if I wanted to say, "I wonder where grandma is," I could do:

>おばあさんはどこにあるかな。

A little bit counter-intuitive, but kana can also be used with negative verbs to express hope.

So something like:

>試験がないかな。

would get you, "I hope we have a test."

The problem is then how do you say, "I hope we don't have a test?" Double negative seems wrong. It might not be even possible with kana, but I'll have to look into it more I guess...

So roughly with this idea of kana, it seems it can be stuck on the ends of a lot of other things to express hope/doubt:

- [volatile form] + kana -> hope to do X but not sure ("I guess I will do X" kinda?)

- -tara [conditional form] + kana -> "How about doing X?"

- [potential form] + kana -> "Can (you) do X?"

Kana looks really fun to use. It's not excitingly new since I can already express wants with -tai form, but kana is just really fun to say (*kanaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa*).

Welp, I should do work now. See y'all around.

---

BTW, this post is a means of learning so it's probably a bad idea to reference it :P

All of the information came from [here](http://maggiesensei.com/2014/05/26/how-to-use-%E3%80%9C%E3%81%8B%E3%81%AA-kana/)
