---
layout: post
title: "Status 599"
subtitle: "It's time for a timeout"
date: "2024-08-15"
categories: Programming
tags: web
---

Recently, I’ve been seeing ads on the Metro targeting the military-industrial
complex. While I didn’t find them terribly interesting per se [^1], they did do
their job and somehow still ended up catching my attention.

## The Ad

Each ad prominently features an HTTP error message plastered on a backdrop of
military personnel along with some rhetoric for the viewer to buy the
product/service advertised or else face implied dire technical consequences.

I’ve only seen two overall variants so far. The first one features the standard
Status 404 that everyone knows and loves [^2].

![Ad featuring status 404](/images/status-599/404.jpg)

The second one, however, features an error code I have never seen before: Status
599.

![Ad featuring status 599](/images/status-599/599.jpg)

## What in the world is Status 599?

Despite working with web APIs every day, this was the first time I had ever
heard of a 599 error code. What exactly is it? And why did the makers of this ad
choose that code specifically?

For starters, Status 599 seems to be non-standard. It does not appear to be
documented in any RFC and neither
[Rust](https://docs.rs/http/latest/http/status/struct.StatusCode.html) nor
[Go](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http) include it as a constant in their list of
status codes.

A cursory Google search indicates that Status 599 is supposedly shown when a
request made to a proxy gets timed out by the upstream service that the proxy is
calling. However, the truth of this is difficult to verify [as several sources
making this claim this seem to circularly refer to each
other](https://github.com/rmaake1/httpstatuses/issues/22#issuecomment-234104647).

Becoming ever more curious, I dug a bit deeper and tried to find exactly what
software products and what kind of situations people encountered Status 599 in.
One source says that [Status 599 has been seen among Microsoft HTTP
proxies](https://www.belugacdn.com/blog/cdn/error-599/) but did not mention any
specific products. Searches across forums also show this error showing up in a
few other products including [SAP Crystal
Reports](https://groups.google.com/g/borland.public.delphi.reporting-charting/c/UKoY3dbb_QM?pli=1),
[Cisco
CUCM](https://community.cisco.com/t5/management/599-error-with-curl-example/td-p/4118771),
[Shadow
PC](https://www.reddit.com/r/ShadowPC/comments/1an4mzu/im_getting_error_code_a599/),
[Proxmox](https://forum.proxmox.com/threads/too-many-redirections-599.107482/),
and [OwnCloud](https://github.com/owncloud/core/issues/40139). A few of these do
seem to corroborate the proxy timeout definition, relating to connectivity
issues with dependencies. Others, not so much. OwnCloud appears to respond with
Status 599 when [something has gone so horribly wrong that the server can’t even
log the error that got
thrown](https://github.com/owncloud/core/blob/master/index.php#L60). Cisco
CUCM’s usage is even more odd, showing Status 599 when the AXL version used by
the client is unsupported, a client error that doesn't seem even remotely
related to timeouts or 5xx server errors at all.

What exactly Status 599 means remains ambiguous, and its varied usage across
actual software products doesn’t help clear much of that fog. Status 599 still
seems like an enigma to me, and I feel like that it is precisely the reason why
it was chosen for this ad. Just imagine paying for a piece of software, getting
an error message that is effectively gibberish while using it, spending week
after week digging through forums and customer support to try to figure out what
is wrong, and finally turning up with absolutely *nothing*. That is extremely
frustrating, and perhaps it is that very frustration that this ad hopes to
conjure up, rudely resurfacing dreadful memories buried deep in the minds of
random IT folks during their otherwise uneventful commutes, all to get their
attention.

## Appendix: Proxy vs Reverse Proxy

Other than sounding like an epic battle of grand proportions concocted and
debated by only the biggest and baddest of nerds, proxy vs reverse proxy is a
question I often find myself asking and answering again and again (mostly due to
my poor memory).

In short, both are man-in-the-middle components used for forwarding requests.
The main difference is that a proxy forwards requests from a private intranet
out to the Internet while a reverse proxy forwards requests from the Internet to
a private intranet.

A proxy makes sense when you have callers sending requests out into the
Internet. For example, let’s say you are a web administrator for a public
school. You want to prevent kids from watching anime on their school laptops.
You could install a content filter on the laptops that intercepts every outbound
HTTP request, checks the origin, and blocks the request if it matches a
blocklisted origin. In this case, the content filter is a proxy. It controls
which requests from the student can make it out into the external Internet.

On the other hand, a reverse proxy makes sense when you have services that
receive requests within your intranet. For example, if you are hosting a server
for a web API, you most likely want to have something like NGINX only route
requests for certain paths to be handled by your application. In this case,
NGINX is a reverse proxy. It controls which requests from the external Internet
can make it into your application.


[^1]: ...or fear. I once encountered an ad featuring a business woman that was
    placed and oriented in just the right way so that she would make eye-contact
    with passengers sitting down.

[^2]: Writing this, I was reminded of The Best 404 Page Ever where I spent much
    of my after school life before Flash got murdered. It apparently lives on
    [here](https://thebest404pageeverredux.com/) thanks to Ruffle.
